Even in the pelting snow, you can enjoy an evening passeggiata in Modena under the porticos that line all the major streets. Dusk in this Emilia-Romagna town is glorious, with lanterns hanging under arches that are home to lots of cosy bars and cafes. It’s a compact historical centre, thronging at weekends when it’s closed to traffic – a delight just to wander at will, enjoying the lively hubbub. Our favourite place for an aperitivo is Mercato Albinelli, the covered market, which stays open late on Saturday evening. We browsed the stalls, picking up some gourmet treats, then made our way to one of the market’s bars, where you can grab a glass of wine with a platter of local prosciutto and Parmesan for a few euro.
Winter barely makes an impression in Sicily, with mild sunny weather the norm. Catania in January was blissfully untouristy but busy with local life. The major highlight was the outdoor produce market, as colourful and theatrical as you’d expect. A few steps from Catania’s Duomo is the fish market, where negotiations echo under the arches and roaming hawkers press you to buy fistfuls of parsley and giant knobbly lemons. Beyond the fish, truckloads of green artichokes and oranges overflow on to the road. Drifting smoke led us to a stall selling chargrilled vegetables - possibly the tastiest I’ve ever eaten. Lunch of fritto misto (a fried mix of fish or vegetables) at Osteria Antica Marina, by the fish market, was heavenly: light and crunchy, perfect with the juice of one of those oversized lemons.
Christmas and New Year celebrations may be over, but the party keeps on going in Palma. For two weeks in January, the city plays host to the fiesta of its patron saint, Sant Sebastià, marked by parades, fireworks, cultural events and street entertainment. On the evening of 19 January, a massive bonfire is lit in Plaça Mayor and pop-up barbecues and free concerts take over the city’s many squares, the revels continuing well into the early hours. Stay in the heart of the action at the stylish Brondo Architect Hotel (doubles from around €71 room only)
Last year, while we were visiting Budapest, our friends took us for a weekend in Brasov – 65 lei (£13) train fare – for a slice of Romania’s winter. We walked the remnants of the town’s original wall, ate traditional sausage from street carts at the outdoor market, all while walking streets so classically “European Winter” they looked as if they’d been created for Christmas cards. I’m sure Bran Castle, which is vaguely connected to the Dracula legend via Vlad the Impaler (£7 entry), is beautiful all year round, but a chill in the air and a frosty blue sky gave it an extra magical quality.
In December, the fairytale squares of the Slovak capital become a real winter wonderland – there are little stalls on the cobbled streets offering handmade wooden toys, beautifully embroidered waistcoats and tablecloths, quality local white wines, beeswax candles, hand-blown glass ornaments, hand-painted pottery and Slovak folk art. There’s delicious mulled wine to warm the cockles amid the frequent snowfalls, folk music performances to set your feet tapping and a huge range of hearty dishes to sample. Try potato pancakes, chunky sausages or frisbee-sized doughnuts, all washed down with – if you’re feeling brave – a shot of hriatö, a hot toddy made from honey, goose fat and alcohol.
Sofia is a great city for a pre-Christmas winter break: the onion-domed churches look stunning in the snow and the Christmas market at Borisova Gradina Park is wonderfully festive. The park was called Freedom Park during the communist years but has reverted to its Bulgarian name. The mulled wine will knock your socks off and it’s cheap too! Stay at Les Fleurs Boutique Hotel (doubles from £110) on Vitosha Boulevard and you will be surrounded by cafes and restaurants. A free walking tour every day from the hotel is a great introduction to the city.
